Mother Teresa by Darcy Adrian Valance
Penguin readers level one, there are a lot of good
people in the world, but not many
of them are world famous. Mother Teresa was a small
quiet nun. She died in 1997 in India,
but people in many countries remember her. They talk about
her and they love her. Why?
Read her story. The answer is here. Agnes Gonsha
For her 13 years, her name was not Teresa. It
was Agnes. Her family name was Boyaggio.
There were two children in the family before her, a
boy and a girl. Then little Agnes Gonsha
came into the world on the 26th of August 1910.
Her mother and father were from Albania,
but they lived in the town of Scopia. At that
time Scopia was in Serbia. They had a good home
because her father did well in his work. Then her
father suddenly died. Agnes was only
eight years old. Her sister was 14 and her brother
was 11. Things were difficult for Agnes's
mother, but she was strong for her children. She worked
and did well. She loved the children
and they had a happy home. There were some poor
people near their home. These people did not
have much money for food and Agnes's mother was good
to them too. She was a Christian, a Catholic
and God was very important to her. She prayed to
God every evening with her children and they
all went to church every week. At the church there
were stories about Christian missionaries in
India and poor African countries. These people lived for God.
They went to India and Africa
because they wanted to bring God's love to poor people
there. Some of the missionaries in India
were men from Scopia. Agnes loved hearing about the work
of these missionaries. She started to
think, what am I going to do for God? She
wanted to live for God, but how? Did she want
to be a
nun? Did she want to live only for God? She
prayed for answers. After five years the answer came to
her. She wanted to live only for him. She wanted
to be a nun in India. Her mother was very
unhappy
about this. She loved her daughter and did not want
to say goodbye to her. She went to her bedroom
and stayed there all day. But after a day and
a night she came out and said to Agnes, put
your
hand in his hand and walk with him. On the
25th of September 1928 Agnes said goodbye to her friends
and her home in Scopia. At the station she said
goodbye to her family. She was 18 years old and
she
did not see her mother or her sister again. To
India. She went by train and boat to Ireland.
There she went to the home of the Loreto nuns.
She wanted to be a Loreto nun because many of
them
worked in India. Agnes stayed with the nuns at Loreto
house in Dublin for six weeks.
Then she was on a boat again to India. She
was now sister Teresa.
These days you can get from Ireland to India very
quickly, but in those days people were on the boat
for seven weeks. It went from Ireland to Spain then
across the Mediterranean Sea to Suez in Egypt
down the Red Sea across the Arabian Sea to Sri
Lanka and then up to Calcutta in India.
From Calcutta she went by train to Darjeeling. Calcutta was
a big place with a lot of noise
but Darjeeling was quiet and beautiful. Young sister Teresa did
not know much English
but she was a good student. She was friendly too
and she often smiled. She was very happy there.
After two years her English was good and she started
to teach children in the nuns school.
Then she moved to one of the Loreto nuns schools
in Calcutta.
Its name was Loreto Antali, a big school for girls.
Many of the girls were from poor families.
The school day started early in the morning but the
nuns day started before that. Every morning
the nuns prayed for a long time. Then they worked
in the school in the morning and the afternoon.
They worked in the evening too because many of the
girls lived at the school. After a long day
they prayed again and then went to bed. The nuns
did not have holidays. They did not listen to music
or go shopping. They did not see their families but
they were happy because they lived for God.
They were happy and strong all day because they remembered
his love every morning.
Sister Teresa liked teaching and she was good at it.
She was a teacher at Loreto Antali for 12 years
and then from 1944 she was the head teacher for
four years.
The Streets of Calcutta
Calcutta or Calcutta today has 15 million people. In the
1940s it was a very big place too
and many new people arrived every year. The people were
Hindus, Muslims,
Christians, Sikhs and Buddhists. Calcutta had beautiful buildings, big hotels,
offices, banks
and houses. Many writers and famous people lived there but
Calcutta had some big problems.
A lot of people were very poor. They did not
have any money and they lived in slons,
bad places with bad houses. Many people did not have
a home. They lived and died in the streets.
The years 1943 to 46 were very bad years for
Calcutta. There was not much food and it was very
expensive. Poor families did not have money for this expensive
food and in those three years
about three million people died. Every day there were dead
people in the streets.
Mother Teresa wanted to help the poor people in the
slums but this was difficult for her.
She was a nun and nuns did not often go
out into the streets. Many nuns helped poor people in
schools, big food kitchens and hospitals but nuns did not
usually go out to poor people in slums.
She prayed to God for an answer to her problem.
On the 10th of September 1946 she was on a
train
from Calcutta to Darjeeling and the answer came to her.
The answer was go and work in the slums
with the poor people. This was new work for a
nun and the head of the Catholic Church in
Calcutta said wait. He wanted to think about it first.
Mother Teresa wanted to start quickly
but she waited two years. Then in August 1948 a
letter came from him. He was happy about her new
work. Loreto Antaly was her home and the nuns were
her only friends but she said goodbye and moved
into a small room near a slum. The blue and
white sari. Indian women usually dress in saris.
There are beautiful expensive saris and there are poor saris
for poor women. Mother Teresa
dressed in a poor blue and white sari because she
wanted to work with very poor people.
Today there are many nuns in these blue and white
saris but on her first day in the slum
mother Teresa was alone. She was only one small woman
with no helpers and no money.
How did she start her new work? First she prayed
to God and then she walked into the slum.
There she talked to poor children. Many of them lived
in the street. They had no home,
no family and no school. She started to teach them
in the street. The children liked her
and the day after that a lot of children came
to her new school. Then they came every day.
One day there was a poor old woman in the
street. She did not have a home and she was
very ill.
The doctors in the hospital did not want her because
she was poor and very old. She was a dying
woman. She did not have a family. She was alone.
People in the street did not want to go near
her
but mother Teresa went to her and talked to her.
She washed the woman and stayed with her.
The woman died but she did not die alone. She
died with a friend with her hand in mother
Teresa's hand. There were often dying people in those streets.
Mother Teresa stayed with them
and they did not die alone. Many poor street people
did not have any food.
Mother Teresa asked people for food for them. Some people
helped her. Some people were angry
and did not help. For two months Mother Teresa worked
alone. It was a difficult time for her.
Then two of her Indian students from Loretta and Tali
came to her and worked with her.
After two years there were 12 nuns with her. They
all had blue and white saris and they had
a name, the missionaries of charity. They worked in street
schools and the open street clinics.
These clinics were not hospitals but they were a big
help for people in the slums.
People in Calcutta started to talk about Mother Teresa and
her missionaries of charity.
Many people wanted to help her and to give money
to her.
In 1952 the government of Calcutta gave her a big
building and she started a home for dying
people there. After this the nuns started a big home
for children. Many poor children in Calcutta
did not have a home or a mother or father.
At the nun's new children's home there was food
and a bed for them and love too. For 10
years Mother Teresa and her missionaries of charity
worked only in Calcutta. Every year there were new nuns.
After 10 years they started to work
away from Calcutta too. They opened new homes for dying
people, homes for children,
schools, clinics and food kitchens in 23 places in India.
A love letter to the world. There are poor people
in every country.
In 1965 the missionaries of charity started working in Venezuela,
South America. After that
they opened a home in Rome. Then they went to
Tanzania and many countries in Africa,
Europe and Asia. In 1969 there was a television program
about Mother Teresa and her work.
It was a BBC programme and it was on British
TV first. After the programme many letters
arrived for her. A lot of people wanted to work
with her or give money.
Then people in Europe, the US and Asia watch the
programme. People in many countries wanted to
help her. Suddenly Mother Teresa was world famous. She did
not like being famous. The
she often said and she is sending a love letter
to the world.
People often asked her about her work. One question was
you are with ill people and dying people every day.
Is it difficult? How do you do it?
Her answer was I see God in every person. For
Mother Teresa, love of God was the important thing.
She wanted to give her love to God but we
cannot see God. We can only see God in people.
She loved poor people and dying people because she loved
God in them. For her this was beautiful,
not difficult. She was on television again in 1979 because
the Nobel Peace Prize went to her.
This famous prize was $150,000 in that year. A
lot of money then.
Every year the prize goes to an important worker for
world peace.
Many important people go to Oslo from many countries for
the prize day.
On that day in 1979, Mother Teresa talked to them
about love and peace. They asked her,
how can we get world peace? She answered, go home
and love your family.
In the 1980s there were missionaries of charity in a
hundred countries.
They were not only in poor countries. There was a
home for dying people in New York too.
Mother Teresa often talked to heads of government in these
countries
but she always dressed in her poor woman's sari. In
1990, Mother Teresa was 80 years old but she
did not start working. Her day started at four o
'clock in the morning. She worked all day and
into the night. She had little sleep. A light in
a dark time. Mother Teresa died in September
1997 at the home of the missionaries of charity in
Calcutta. At that time there were 4,000 missionaries
of charity in 123 countries and 3 million people worked
with them. People wanted to see her and say
goodbye to her. Poor people from Calcutta and people from
the government of India came.
Important people arrived from many countries. One person said about
her. She was a light in a dark time.
Mother Teresa was a light for the poor people of
Calcutta but she is a light for all of us
too
in every country of the world.